https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/ss/ss6601a1.htm


Trends in Annual Age-Adjusted Death Rates, 1999–2014
During 1999–2014, annual age-adjusted death rates for heart disease, stroke, cancer, unintentional injury, and chronic lower respiratory disease were higher in nonmetropolitan areas than in metropolitan areas (Figure 2). Age-adjusted death rates for unintentional injury were approximately 50% higher in nonmetropolitan areas than in metropolitan areas for most of this period. Both in nonmetropolitan and metropolitan areas, annual age-adjusted death rates for heart disease and stroke decreased; however, the rate of decrease for heart disease was slower in nonmetropolitan areas, whereas the rates of decrease for stroke were similar. During 1999–2014, annual age-adjusted death rates for chronic lower respiratory disease decreased in metropolitan areas and increased in nonmetropolitan areas. Although the annual age-adjusted death rates for cancer decreased in both localities during this period, the rate of decrease was slower in nonmetropolitan areas. The annual age-adjusted death rates for unintentional injury increased at similar rates in nonmetropolitan and metropolitan areas.

Potentially Excess Deaths, 2010–2014
As the number of persons aged <80 years living in nonmetropolitan areas of the United States decreased from 44.3 million in 2010 to 44.1 million in 2014 (an average of 0.1% per year), the numbers of potentially excess deaths in nonmetropolitan areas decreased for cancer an average of 2.7% per year, increased for chronic lower respiratory disease an average of 3.2% per year, and remained stable for heart disease, stroke, and unintentional injury (Figure 3). In 2014, the number of potentially excess deaths among those aged <80 years for the five leading causes of death in nonmetropolitan areas of the United States were 25,278 from heart disease, 19,055 from cancer, 12,165 from unintentional injury, 10,676 from chronic lower respiratory disease, and 4,108 from stroke.

Compared with metropolitan areas, a higher percentage of deaths occurring in nonmetropolitan areas from the five leading causes among those aged <80 years were potentially excess deaths (Figure 4). For example, in 2014, 42.6% of heart disease deaths among persons aged <80 years in nonmetropolitan areas were potentially excess deaths, compared with 27.8% in metropolitan areas. Approximately half of deaths among persons aged <80 years from unintentional injury (57.5%) and chronic lower respiratory disease (54.3%) in nonmetropolitan areas were potentially excess deaths, compared with 39.2% and 30.9%, respectively, in metropolitan areas.

The percentages of potentially excess deaths among persons aged <80 years from the five leading causes varied widely across HHS public health regions (Figure 5). In most public health regions, nonmetropolitan areas had a higher percentage of potentially excess deaths among persons aged <80 years than did metropolitan areas. For example, in 2014 in region 9 (Arizona, California, Hawaii, and Nevada), 65.0% of unintentional injury deaths in nonmetropolitan areas were potentially excess deaths, compared with 29.2% in metropolitan areas. Nonmetropolitan areas of region 4 (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee) and region 6 (Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas) had the highest percentages of heart disease, cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, and stroke deaths that were potentially excess deaths. Metropolitan areas of region 1 (Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont) had the lowest percentages of heart disease and stroke deaths that were potentially excess deaths, and metropolitan areas of region 2 (New Jersey and New York) had the lowest percentages of unintentional injury and chronic lower respiratory disease deaths that were potentially excess deaths.

During 1999–2014, nonmetropolitan areas had higher age-adjusted death rates from the five leading causes of death than metropolitan areas, consistent with previous reports (13). During this period, the age-adjusted death rates for heart disease, cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, and stroke in metropolitan areas decreased. In nonmetropolitan areas, the rates for heart disease, cancer, and stroke decreased but increased for chronic lower respiratory disease. Both in nonmetropolitan and metropolitan areas, the rates for unintentional injury increased. During this period, differences in age-adjusted death rates between nonmetropolitan and metropolitan areas either persisted or increased for the five leading causes of death. Consistent with previous studies, considerable numbers of deaths among persons aged <80 years from the five leading causes of death were identified as potentially excess deaths nationally (7,8). Data from this report indicate that the percentage of deaths among persons aged <80 years that are potentially excess deaths was higher in nonmetropolitan areas than in metropolitan areas, which is a new finding. Moreover, this difference was observed in most public health regions, even as percentages varied widely across the United States.

Previous research has shown that residents of nonmetropolitan areas, compared with residents of metropolitan areas, report poorer physical and mental health and have higher rates of health risk factors for the leading causes of death, including factors such as cigarette smoking, obesity, physical inactivity during leisure time, and not wearing car seat belts (2,3,14). They tend to have less access to health care services and to be less likely to receive preventive services (5). In addition, they are more likely to be uninsured or underinsured, delay seeking care, live in poverty, and have lower educational attainment (1,5). The high percentage of potentially excess deaths reported in nonmetropolitan areas might be related to the poorer health, limited socioeconomic resources, restricted access to high-quality emergency and specialty care such as trauma centers and stroke centers, and reduced emergency medical service capability (15) that exist in many nonmetropolitan communities. Although a greater number of potentially excess deaths occur in metropolitan areas because of the larger populations, these findings suggest that a greater percentage of deaths in nonmetropolitan areas might be potentially excess deaths and thus are relevant for public health prevention efforts focused on rural populations. Ongoing work by CDC to reduce rates of smoking (16) and obesity (17) are particularly important because these risk factors contribute to increased risk for heart disease, stroke, chronic lower respiratory disease, and cancer (18,19). In addition, CDC’s efforts to increase access to preventive services, such as cancer screening (20) and cardiovascular risk reduction (21), address barriers that persons living in nonmetropolitan areas might face.